---
order: 5
---
# 5. 命令行环境

:::tip
本文为纯英文笔记
:::

## Job Control

Example: `sleep 20` and **Ctrl+C** to send *SIGINT* (stands for "SIGnal INTerrupt"). `man signal` for a list of all the signals.

Example: Ctrl+C does not necessarily terminate a program. The `signal` Python package can be used to handle signal in a callback manner and we can actually do nothing but print a line in the handler.

**Ctrl+\\** for SIGQUIT, whose behavior is similar to SIGINT/SIGTERM by default.

**Ctrl+Z** to send SIGSTOP which would normally *suspend*（挂起） the job.

Example: `sleep 1000` and Ctrl+Z makes the process *suspended*. Appending an `&` to the command makes it running at background.

Suspended and background jobs can be viewed through `jobs` command.

To bring a background job back to running, use `bg %i` where `i` is the number listed in `jobs` output (somehow related to the SIGCONT signal here).

`fg` is similar to `bg` but reattaches the job output to current stdout, which is more like "continuing a job" in some way.

`kill` command can not only *kill* but also send signals, which is useful.
- `kill -STOP %1` sends SIGSTOP to the 1st job listed, causing it to be suspended again.
- `kill -HUP %1` sends SIGHUP to the 1st job, causing it to stop running.

SIGHUP is the signal sent when we close a session by like closing the terminal window or end the SSH connection. By default, SIGHUP will cause the process to quit. To bypass this behavior, precede the comamnd with `nohup`.

## Terminal Multiplexers

Terminal multiplexers allow you to have multiple shells running simultaneously in the same window. Fundamentally it's no different from opening multiple GUI window but more "terminal" or say, unix-style, as in *multiplexing* the terminal.

Common terminal multiplexers: tmux, screen (older)

Tmux hierachy: Sessions, Windows, Panes.
- Sessions: independent *sessions* managed by tmux directly.
- Windows: tabs in a session.
- Panes: windows in a tab.

Simple use: `tmux` for a default session (numbered 0).

`tmux new -t tag` for a named(tagged) session.

`tmux ls` for listing the sessions.

Reattach: `tmux a` for reattaching to the defautl session, `tmux a -t tag` for reattaching to a particular named session.

Tmux commands: for manipulating tmux sessions, etc. Textual form and key bindings are available. For key bindings, the prefix default to Ctrl+B but most people just remap it to Ctrl+A for ergonomics.
- **Ctrl+A D** detaches a session (back to the main shell)
- **Ctrl+A P** for previous session
- **Ctrl+A N** for next session
- **Ctrl+A C** creates a new window in a session
- **Ctrl+A [number]** let you switch between windows in a session by number
- **Ctrl+A [↑/↓/←/→]** let you switch between panes in a window by direction
- **Ctrl+A "** splits the focused pane with a horizontal divider
- **Ctrl+A %** splits the focused pane with a vertical divider
- **Ctrl+A ␣** let you through different layouts
- **Ctrl+A Z** let you zoom (or unzoom, toggle) into a pane making it "fullscreen" in the terminal

## dotfiles

dotfiles are configuration files whose name starts with a dot for historical reason.

## Remote Machines

`ssh-copy-id` is a tool specificially designed to copy a local public key to `authorized_keys` on a remote machine.

With Tmux, for a rare situation like when you have the prefix of the key bindings configured to Ctrl+A both on the local and remote machine, which is kind of conflict, you can still perform Ctrl+A based operations on the remote machine by sending Ctrl+A twice. Like **Ctrl+A Ctrl+A D** for detaching a session on the remote machine. *Source [starts from Lecture 5 55:29](https://youtu.be/e8BO_dYxk5c?t=3329)*